Programming Assignment 7
Attack of the Robots

The Mechanoids of Planet Zork have captured you! To satisfy their lust for oilshed and bloodshed, they have thrown you in an arena with killer robots. Well, that's the scenario for a new video game under development. Your assignment is to complete the prototype that uses character-based graphics.

Each robot is equipped with a radio receiver tuned to one of three channels. If the robot receives a command transmitted on the channel its receiver is tuned to, it will obey that command. There is a transmitter that lets one choose a channel and broadcast a command to all robots listening on that channel. The player managed to steal the transmitter, but it was damaged in the fight; half the time, an attempt to transmit a command won't work.

If you execute this Windows program or this Mac program, you will see the player (indicated by @) in a rectangular arena filled with killer robots (each indicated by a digit character, the number of the channel the robot's receiver is tuned to). At each turn, you'll select an action for the player to take: move one step or stay put. The player will take the action. You will then tell the player a command to transmit on one particular channel. Then each robot will move. Normally, each robot will move one step in a random direction. However, if the transmitter works this turn (half the time it won't), those robots listening on the channel selected will move one step in the direction commanded. If a robot moves onto the grid point occupied by the player, the player dies. (If the player moves to a grid point occupied by a robot, the player dies, so that would be a dumb move.)

The grid points may have wall segments. If the player or a robot moving of its own free will chooses a direction such that moving would be to a grid point occupied by a wall or to a point off the grid, then the player or robot just doesn't move that turn. If a robot moving under the command of the player attempts to move into a wall or off the grid, it doesn't move that turn, but suffers 1 unit of damage. A robot that has suffered 3 units of damage is dead and is removed from the game. Clearly, it's in the player's interest to command robots to smash into walls or the edges of the grid.

This smaller Windows version or Mac version of the game may help you see the operation of the game more clearly.

At each turn the player may take one of these actions:


Stand. In this case, the player does not move.
Move one step north, east, south, or west. If the player attempts to move onto a wall or out of the arena (e.g., south, when on the bottom row), the result is the same as standing. If player moves to a grid point currently occupied by a robot, the player dies.
The game allows the user to select the player's action: n/e/s/w for movement, or x for standing. The user may also just hit enter to have the computer select the player's move.

After the player moves, the user is prompted for a broadcast to attempt. You enter a two-character string such as "2n". The first character is the channel number and the second is n/e/s/w. At the robots' turn, there is a 1/2 probability that the broadcast will succeed. If it does, all robots listening on that channel move one step in the direction commanded if they can; if they can't (because they'd hit a wall or move off the grid), they stay put, but suffer 1 unit of damage. If the broadcast doesn't succeed, the robots listening on that channel act like all the other robots on that turn: They move normally.

Normally, each robot picks a random direction (north, east, south, west) with equal probability. The robot moves one step in that direction if it can; if the robot attempts to move into a wall or off the grid, however, it does not move and suffers no damage. More than one robot may occupy the same grid point; in that case, the display will show a digit character indicating the channel number of one of the robots at that point (the choice is arbitrary).

Your assignment is to complete this C++ program skeleton to produce a program that implements the described behavior. (We've indicated where you have work to do by comments containing the text TODO.) The program skeleton you are to flesh out defines four classes that represent the four kinds of objects this program works with: Game, Arena, Robot, and Player. Details of the interface to these classes are in the program skeleton, but here are the essential responsibilities of each class:


Game

To create a Game, you specify a number of rows and columns and the number of robots to start with. The Game object creates an appropriately sized Arena and populates it with some walls, the Player, and the Robots.
A game may be played.

Arena

When an Arena object of a particular size is created, it has no positions occupied by wall segments, robots, or the player. In the Arena coordinate system, row 1, column 1 is the upper-left-most position. If an Arena had 10 rows and 20 columns, its lower-right corner would be row 10, column 20.
You may tell an Arena object to put a wall segment at a particular position.
You ask an Arena object whether there's a wall segment at a particular position.
You may tell an Arena object to create a Robot at a particular position, that listens on a particular channel.
You may tell an Arena object to create a Player at a particular position.
You may tell an Arena object to have all the robots in it make their move.
You may ask an Arena object its size, how many robots are at a particular position, and how many robots altogether are in the Arena.
You may ask an Arena object for access to its player.
An Arena object may be displayed on the screen, showing the locations of the walls, robots, and the player, along with other status information.

Player

A Player is created at some position.
A Player may be told to stand or to move in a direction.
A Player may be told it has died.
You may ask a Player for its position and its alive/dead status.

Robot

A robot is created at some position with a channel it listens to.
You may tell a Robot to move.
You may tell a Robot to move in a particular direction. This is a forced move, and the robot will suffer 1 unit of damage if it can't move.
You may ask a Robot object for its position, channel number, and alive/dead status.
The skeleton program you are to complete has all of the class definitions and implementations in one source file, which is awkward. Since we haven't yet learned about separate compilation, we'll have to live with it.

Complete the implementation in accordance with the description of the game. You are allowed to make whatever changes you want to the privateparts of the classes: You may add or remove private data members or private member functions, or change their types. You must not make any deletions, additions, or changes to the public interface of any of these classes — we're depending on them staying the same so that we can test your programs. You can, of course, make changes to the implementations of public member functions, since the callers of the function wouldn't have to change any of the code they write to call the function. You must not declare any public data members, nor use any global variables other than the global constants already in the skeleton code, except that you may add additional global constants if you wish. You may add additional functions that are not members of any class.

Any member functions you implement should never put an object into an invalid state, one that will cause a problem later on. (For example, bad things could come from placing a robot outside the arena.) If a function has a reasonable way of indicating failure through its return value, it should do so. Constructors pose a special difficulty because they can't return a value. If a constructor can't do its job, we have it write an error message and exit the program with failure by calling exit(1);. (We haven't learned about throwing an exception to signal constructor failure.)

What you will turn in for this assignment is a zip file containing this one file and nothing more:

A text file named robots.cpp that contains the source code for the completed C++ program. This program must build successfully, and its correctness must not depend on undefined program behavior. Your program must not leak memory: Any object dynamically allocated during the execution of your program must be deleted (once only, of course) by the time your main routine returns normally.

Notice that you do not have to turn in a report describing the design of the program and your test cases.

The turn in Project 7 link on the class webpage enables you to turn in your zip file electronically. Turn in the file by the due time above.